requirements/Phase0Task.md, before:

# Phase 0: MicroQuickJS Hardening & Determinism (v5.1)

This phase focuses on transforming the standard QuickJS engine into **MicroQuickJS**, a sealed, per-request sandbox runtime that guarantees **deterministic execution semantics** with **sub-millisecond reuse overhead** for MTPScript v5.1.

## 1. Snapshot-Based Execution Model

### 1.1 VM Snapshot Creation & Signing
- [ ] Implement build-time snapshot generation (`.msqs` format) - immutable, 150–400 kB
- [ ] Add ECDSA-P256 signature verification for snapshots before runtime mapping
- [ ] Implement `clone_vm()` with copy-on-write semantics (≤ 60 µs best-case, ≤ 1 ms worst-case under EFS/FUSE cold page fault)
- [ ] Add secure wipe functionality for pages containing PCI-classified data

### 1.2 Per-Request Sandbox Isolation
- [ ] Ensure one fresh VM per request with no cross-request state leakage
- [ ] Implement VM discard after every request with secure memory wipe
- [ ] Add host effect re-injection per VM after static initializers
- [ ] Guarantee zero ambient authority and zero hidden I/O

## 2. Deterministic Seed Injection

### 2.1 Seed Algorithm Implementation
- [ ] Implement SHA-256 deterministic seed from canonical concatenation:
  ```
  seed = SHA-256(
    AWS_Request_Id       ||
    AWS_Account_Id       ||
    Function_Version     ||
    "mtpscript-v5.1"     ||
    Snapshot_Content_Hash||
    Gas_Limit_ASCII      // ASCII decimal, no leading zeros
  )
  ```
- [ ] Ensure seed is never reused across requests
- [ ] Bind seed into VM state before any static initializer execution

### 2.2 Runtime Determinism Guarantees
- [ ] Remove all non-deterministic features (Date.now, Math.random, etc.)
- [ ] Implement total structural equality (no reference identity) for all types
- [ ] Include closure environments in structural equality of functions
- [ ] Implement deterministic CBOR serialization (RFC 7049 §3.9) for hashing
- [ ] Ensure FNV-1a 64-bit hashing for structural equality
- [ ] Implement deterministic object key iteration order per §5 (Type tag → Hash → CBOR tie-break)
- [ ] Explicitly exclude functions from being used as map keys

## 3. Runtime Gas Limit Injection

### 3.1 Host Adapter Gas Contract
- [ ] Add `MTP_GAS_LIMIT` environment variable reading (default: 10,000,000)
- [ ] Implement gas limit range validation (1–2,000,000,000 inclusive)
- [ ] Inject 64-bit unsigned `gasLimit` into VM state
- [ ] Add gas limit to audit log (`gasLimit=<value>`)

### 3.2 Gas Exhaustion Semantics
- [ ] Implement gas cost table (Annex A) with fixed β-reduction units
- [ ] Add cumulative gas tracking against injected `gasLimit`
- [ ] Implement deterministic gas exhaustion error:
  ```json
  {
    "error": "GasExhausted",
    "gasLimit": <uint64>,
    "gasUsed": <uint64>
  }
  ```
- [ ] Ensure tail calls cost 0 gas units

## 4. IEEE-754 Decimal Arithmetic

### 4.1 Decimal Type Implementation
- [ ] Integrate C decimal library with IEEE-754-2008 decimal128 compliance
- [ ] Implement `Decimal` type with 1–34 digit significand and 0–28 scale
- [ ] Add round-half-even rounding (ties to even per clause 4.3.2)
- [ ] Implement overflow handling with `Result<Decimal, Overflow>`

### 4.2 Decimal Operations
- [ ] Support constant-time comparison algorithm with scale normalization
- [ ] Implement shortest canonical string serialization (no trailing zeros)
- [ ] Expose decimal arithmetic as MicroQuickJS globals
- [ ] Ensure deterministic serialization/deserialization

## 5. Engine Hardening & Security

### 5.1 Forbidden JavaScript Features
- [ ] Disable `eval()`, `new Function()`, and dynamic code loading
- [ ] Remove `class`, `this`, `try/catch/finally` constructs
- [ ] Forbid loops, global mutation, and reflection/introspection
- [ ] Patch MicroQuickJS to forbid double-path for integers > 2⁵³-1
- [ ] Ensure `JsonNull` is inhabited only through parsing (no literal support)
- [ ] **Remove JavaScript event loop visibility** (no `setTimeout`, `Promise` microtasks, etc.)

### 5.2 Memory & Resource Constraints
- [ ] Implement strict heap allocation tracking with fixed memory budget
- [ ] Remove all OS-level access (filesystem, network, process)
- [ ] Implement **block-synchronous host effect execution** for `Async.await`
- [ ] Add immutable `Object.prototype` and globals to prevent prototype pollution
- [ ] Ensure no shared mutable state across requests

## 6. Canonical JSON Output

### 6.1 Deterministic Serialization
- [ ] Implement RFC 8785 canonical JSON with duplicate-key rejection
- [ ] Ensure object keys ordered by §5 rules (type tag, hash, CBOR tie-break)
- [ ] Add decimal shortest form serialization (no `-0`, `NaN`, `Infinity`)
- [ ] Preserve array order from source literals (left-associative)

### 6.2 Response Hashing
- [ ] Generate SHA-256 of canonical JSON response body
- [ ] Ensure bit-exact SHA-256 response across conforming runtimes
- [ ] Include gas exhaustion errors in deterministic response format

## Acceptance Criteria (v5.1)

### Functional Requirements
- [ ] All MicroQuickJS bytecode produces identical SHA-256 hash across platforms
- [ ] Per-request sandbox isolation with ≤ 1 ms cold-start overhead
- [ ] Deterministic seed algorithm produces same 32-byte seed for identical inputs
- [ ] Gas limit injection and exhaustion work within 1–2,000,000,000 range
- [ ] Decimal arithmetic compliant with IEEE-754-2008 decimal128

### Security & Audit Requirements
- [ ] Zero cross-request state leakage (secure wipe verified)
- [ ] All forbidden JavaScript features properly disabled
- [ ] ECDSA-P256 snapshot signature verification functional
- [ ] Host effects injected deterministically using request seed
- [ ] Canonical JSON output enables deterministic response hashing

### Performance Requirements
- [ ] VM clone time: ≤ 60 µs best-case, ≤ 1 ms worst-case under EFS page fault
- [ ] Memory usage stays within configured heap limit (no shared heap)
- [ ] Gas counting accurately terminates execution at budget exhaustion
- [ ] Deterministic CBOR and FNV-1a hashing performance adequate for serverless

### Test Coverage
- [ ] All tests in `tests/` pass with zero failures
- [ ] Snapshot lifecycle (build → sign → verify → clone → execute → wipe) functional
- [ ] Cross-platform determinism verified on different OS/CPU architectures
- [ ] Gas cost table (Annex A) accurately implemented and tested

Commit message:

Add Phase 1 requirements for MTPScript compiler and runtime infrastructure. Outline specifications for compiler frontend, type system, module/package system, effect system, code generation, standard library, and CLI tooling. Ensure zero external dependencies and establish acceptance criteria for functionality and reproducibility.

requirements/Phase0Task.md, after:

# Phase 0: MicroQuickJS Hardening & Determinism (v5.1)

This phase focuses on transforming the standard QuickJS engine into **MicroQuickJS**, a sealed, per-request sandbox runtime that guarantees **deterministic execution semantics** with **sub-millisecond reuse overhead** for MTPScript v5.1.

## 1. Snapshot-Based Execution Model

### 1.1 VM Snapshot Creation & Signing
- [ ] Implement build-time snapshot generation (`.msqs` format) - immutable, 150–400 kB
- [ ] Add ECDSA-P256 signature verification for snapshots before runtime mapping
- [ ] Implement `clone_vm()` with copy-on-write semantics (≤ 60 µs best-case, ≤ 1 ms worst-case under EFS/FUSE cold page fault)
- [ ] Add secure wipe functionality for pages containing PCI-classified data

### 1.2 Per-Request Sandbox Isolation
- [ ] Ensure one fresh VM per request with no cross-request state leakage
- [ ] Implement VM discard after every request with secure memory wipe
- [ ] Add host effect re-injection per VM after static initializers
- [ ] Guarantee zero ambient authority and zero hidden I/O

## 2. Deterministic Seed Injection

### 2.1 Seed Algorithm Implementation
- [ ] Implement SHA-256 deterministic seed from canonical concatenation:
  ```
  seed = SHA-256(
    AWS_Request_Id       ||
    AWS_Account_Id       ||
    Function_Version     ||
    "mtpscript-v5.1"     ||
    Snapshot_Content_Hash||
    Gas_Limit_ASCII      // ASCII decimal, no leading zeros
  )
  ```
- [ ] Ensure seed is never reused across requests
- [ ] Bind seed into VM state before any static initializer execution

### 2.2 Runtime Determinism Guarantees
- [ ] Remove all non-deterministic features (Date.now, Math.random, etc.)
- [ ] Implement total structural equality (no reference identity) for all types
- [ ] Include closure environments in structural equality of functions
- [ ] Implement deterministic CBOR serialization (RFC 7049 §3.9) for hashing
- [ ] Ensure FNV-1a 64-bit hashing for structural equality
- [ ] Implement deterministic object key iteration order per §5 (Type tag → Hash → CBOR tie-break)
- [ ] Explicitly exclude functions from being used as map keys

## 3. Runtime Gas Limit Injection

### 3.1 Host Adapter Gas Contract
- [ ] Add `MTP_GAS_LIMIT` environment variable reading (default: 10,000,000)
- [ ] Implement gas limit range validation (1–2,000,000,000 inclusive)
- [ ] Inject 64-bit unsigned `gasLimit` into VM state
- [ ] **Ensure `gasLimit` is invisible to guest code** (cannot be read or queried) (§7)
- [ ] Add gas limit to audit log (`gasLimit=<value>`)

### 3.2 Gas Exhaustion Semantics
- [ ] Implement gas cost table (Annex A) with fixed β-reduction units
- [ ] Add cumulative gas tracking against injected `gasLimit`
- [ ] Implement deterministic gas exhaustion error:
  ```json
  {
    "error": "GasExhausted",
    "gasLimit": <uint64>,
    "gasUsed": <uint64>
  }
  ```
- [ ] Ensure tail calls cost 0 gas units

## 4. IEEE-754 Decimal Arithmetic

### 4.1 Decimal Type Implementation
- [ ] Integrate C decimal library with IEEE-754-2008 decimal128 compliance
- [ ] Implement `Decimal` type with 1–34 digit significand and 0–28 scale
- [ ] Add round-half-even rounding (ties to even per clause 4.3.2)
- [ ] Implement overflow handling with `Result<Decimal, Overflow>`

### 4.2 Decimal Operations
- [ ] Support constant-time comparison algorithm with scale normalization
- [ ] Implement shortest canonical string serialization (no trailing zeros)
- [ ] Expose decimal arithmetic as MicroQuickJS globals
- [ ] Ensure deterministic serialization/deserialization

## 5. Engine Hardening & Security

### 5.1 Forbidden JavaScript Features
- [ ] Disable `eval()`, `new Function()`, and dynamic code loading
- [ ] Remove `class`, `this`, `try/catch/finally` constructs
- [ ] Forbid loops, global mutation, and reflection/introspection
- [ ] **Disable all floating-point math and JS `Number` (double) support** (§1.2)
- [ ] **Disable implicit type coercions** (strict equality and typing only) (§1.2)
- [ ] Patch MicroQuickJS to forbid double-path for integers > 2⁵³-1
- [ ] Ensure `JsonNull` is inhabited only through parsing (no literal support)
- [ ] **Remove JavaScript event loop visibility** (no `setTimeout`, `Promise` microtasks, etc.)

### 5.2 Memory & Resource Constraints
- [ ] Implement strict heap allocation tracking with fixed memory budget
- [ ] Remove all OS-level access (filesystem, network, process)
- [ ] Implement **sensitive page tracking** for selective secure wipe (§22)
- [ ] Implement **block-synchronous host effect execution** for `Async.await`
- [ ] Add immutable `Object.prototype` and globals to prevent prototype pollution
- [ ] Ensure no shared mutable state across requests

## 6. Canonical JSON Output

### 6.1 Deterministic Serialization
- [ ] Implement RFC 8785 canonical JSON with duplicate-key rejection
- [ ] Ensure object keys ordered by §5 rules (type tag, hash, CBOR tie-break)
- [ ] Add decimal shortest form serialization (no `-0`, `NaN`, `Infinity`)
- [ ] Preserve array order from source literals (left-associative)

### 6.2 Response Hashing
- [ ] Generate SHA-256 of canonical JSON response body
- [ ] Ensure bit-exact SHA-256 response across conforming runtimes
- [ ] Include gas exhaustion errors in deterministic response format

## Acceptance Criteria (v5.1)

### Functional Requirements
- [ ] All MicroQuickJS bytecode produces identical SHA-256 hash across platforms
- [ ] Per-request sandbox isolation with ≤ 1 ms cold-start overhead
- [ ] Deterministic seed algorithm produces same 32-byte seed for identical inputs
- [ ] Gas limit injection and exhaustion work within 1–2,000,000,000 range
- [ ] Decimal arithmetic compliant with IEEE-754-2008 decimal128

### Security & Audit Requirements
- [ ] Zero cross-request state leakage (secure wipe verified)
- [ ] All forbidden JavaScript features properly disabled
- [ ] ECDSA-P256 snapshot signature verification functional
- [ ] Host effects injected deterministically using request seed
- [ ] Canonical JSON output enables deterministic response hashing

### Performance Requirements
- [ ] VM clone time: ≤ 60 µs best-case, ≤ 1 ms worst-case under EFS page fault
- [ ] Memory usage stays within configured heap limit (no shared heap)
- [ ] Gas counting accurately terminates execution at budget exhaustion
- [ ] Deterministic CBOR and FNV-1a hashing performance adequate for serverless

### Test Coverage
- [ ] All tests in `tests/` pass with zero failures
- [ ] Snapshot lifecycle (build → sign → verify → clone → execute → wipe) functional
- [ ] Cross-platform determinism verified on different OS/CPU architectures
- [ ] Gas cost table (Annex A) accurately implemented and tested
